\section{Policy regarding students entering the CMSE PhD program with prior graduate coursework}
\label{sec:prior_coursework}

\vspace{4mm}
\noindent
\textbf{Applicability of this policy:} This policy was
approved by the CMSE Graduate Studies Committee on May 1, 2017 and is
valid for all CMSE PhD students, regardless of start date (i.e., it
may be applied retroactively to students who started in the PhD
program prior to May 1, 2017).  This policy does not apply to students
pursuing a terminal Master's degree in CMSE, who must complete a
minimum of 30 credits of graduate-level coursework to attain the
degree.

\vspace{2mm}
\noindent
\textbf{Reason for this policy:} The CMSE graduate handbook states
that “Students must take a minimum of 30 credit hours of
non-research-based coursework beyond the Bachelor’s level.”  However,
some students enter the CMSE PhD program with substantial amounts of
prior graduate-level coursework (which may include a M.S., PhD, or
graduate coursework without a degree).  We wish to ensure that
students entering the CMSE PhD program with prior graduate coursework
can have this training taken into account while simultaneously
ensuring that students still receive adequate preparation for their
CMSE dissertation research.

\vspace{2mm}
\noindent
\textbf{Core CMSE courses:} Up to two of the four core CMSE courses
can be waived.  In order for this to happen, the student must provide
a copy of the syllabus for the equivalent course(s) as well as the
name of the textbook(s) used, problem sets/projects, and exams (if
available).  These materials will be shared with the faculty who most
recently taught the equivalent core courses as well as the members of
the Graduate Studies Committee, who will collectively determine if the
courses are approximately equivalent to the CMSE core course and the
student’s achievement is equivalent to at least a 3.5 on the subject
exam.  At the recommendation of the faculty member, that course (and
corresponding subject exam) may be waived.  If the faculty member is
not willing to make such a recommendation, the student has the option
of taking the subject exam at the beginning of the fall semester to
test out of the course and receive credit for the subject exam.  To do
so, they must pass with a minimum grade of 3.5.

\vspace{2mm}
\noindent
\textbf{Cognate coursework:} The purpose of the cognate coursework is
to supplement the core CMSE courses and ensure that students are
well-prepared for their dissertation research.  To this end, the
graduate director, in consultation with the student’s dissertation
advisor and committee, will evaluate the student’s prior graduate
coursework and determine which, if any, of their prior courses relate
to their dissertation research.  Assuming a significant amount of
their prior coursework provides preparation for their dissertation
research, the committee will then determine a coherent set of courses
at MSU that provide broader and/or deeper training for their
dissertation research.  Regardless of prior preparation, students must
take a minimum of 6 credits of coursework beyond the core courses.

\vspace{2mm}
\noindent
\textbf{30 credit requirement:} The requirement of a minimum of 30
credits of coursework while enrolled in the CMSE PhD program may be
waived by the Graduate Director, in consultation with the student’s
dissertation advisor and dissertation committee.  The overall
guideline for the total amount of coursework is that the student’s
relevant prior graduate coursework, plus courses taken while in the
CMSE PhD program, should meet or exceed the equivalent of 30 credits
of graduate-level coursework at MSU.

\vspace{2mm}
\noindent
\textbf{Extenuating circumstances:} In truly extenuating circumstances
where a student has a particularly large amount of relevant prior
graduate-level training, the Graduate Director, in consultation with
the student’s dissertation advisor and dissertation committee, may
modify the above policy.


